Here’s a practical outline for building an AI-powered cocktail search pipeline with ChatGPT-like responses, using your Cosmos DB and React UI:

1. Data Preparation
Export cocktail data from Cosmos DB (recipes, ingredients, descriptions, etc.).
Clean and normalize text fields (remove duplicates, fix typos, standardize formats).
2. Embedding & Indexing
Use a strong text embedding model (e.g., BGE, E5, or OpenAI embeddings) to convert cocktail data into vector representations.
Store these vectors in a vector database (Qdrant, Pinecone, or even Qdrant in your stack).
3. Query Pipeline
When a user sends a free text query:
Embed the query using the same embedding model.
Search the vector DB for nearest matches (semantic search).
Retrieve top N cocktail records.
4. LLM Response Generation
Pass the user query and retrieved cocktail data to an LLM (Ollama, vLLM, or OpenAI API).
Use a prompt template:
“User asked: {query}. Here are matching cocktails: {cocktail info}. Respond conversationally and helpfully.”
LLM generates a natural language answer, summarizing and explaining results.
5. API Layer
Build a backend API (Python FastAPI, Node.js, etc.) to:
Accept queries from your React app.
Run embedding, vector search, and LLM response steps.
Return the final answer to the UI.
6. UI Integration
In your React app, send user queries to the backend.
Display the LLM-generated response (with cocktail details, links, etc.).
7. Model Training (Optional)
If you want a custom model, fine-tune an open-source LLM on cocktail Q&A pairs.
Use your proprietary data for supervised training.
8. Monitoring & Feedback
Log queries and responses.
Collect user feedback to improve search and model quality.
Summary:
You’ll combine semantic search (vector DB + embeddings) with LLM response generation for ChatGPT-like answers. Your stack already has most components (Qdrant, Ollama, TEI). The missing piece is the backend API to orchestrate the pipeline and connect to your React UI.



Embedding

For best results with vector embeddings, chunk your cocktail data by semantic meaning and use-case relevance. Here’s a recommended approach for the “Americano” example:

1. Chunk by Key Sections
a. Title & Descriptive Title

Chunk: "Title": "Americano"
Chunk: "DescriptiveTitle": "The Americano Cocktail: A Timeless Italian Classic"
b. Description

Chunk: "Description": "A classic cocktail made with Campari, sweet vermouth, and a splash of soda water, garnished with an orange slice..."
c. Ingredients

Chunk: List each ingredient as a single string, e.g.
"Ingredients: Campari, Sweet Vermouth, Soda Water, Orange Slice"
d. Instructions

Chunk: Concatenate all instructions into one string, e.g.
"Instructions: Fill a rocks glass with ice and pour in the Campari and sweet vermouth. Top with soda water. Garnish with an orange slice or twist."
e. Historical/Story Content

Chunk: The main “Content” field (the long markdown text about history, variations, etc.)
2. Why Chunk This Way?
Semantic Search: Each chunk represents a distinct concept (name, description, recipe, story) so queries can match the most relevant part.
Context Window: Embedding models work best with focused, concise text (100–500 tokens per chunk).
Retrieval: You can return the most relevant chunk(s) for a user query, then assemble a full answer.
3. Implementation Tips
Use the same chunking logic for all cocktails.
Store each chunk with metadata (cocktail ID, chunk type).
When a user queries, embed the query and search all chunks for best matches.
Optionally, concatenate top chunks for LLM response generation.
Summary:
Chunk by: Title, Descriptive Title, Description, Ingredients, Instructions, and Story/History.
This maximizes semantic search quality and LLM response relevance.